Okay!

Great. Warm-up: in your own words, what’s the difference between x = 5 and x == 5—and why does that distinction matter?


x=5 is assigning 5 to be the value of x, while x==5 is asking if x equals 5 and returns true or false 

Exactly—one is a command that changes what x holds; the other is a question that produces a Boolean result. What do you predict Python does with if x = 10:?


Give an error? 

Yes—it gives a SyntaxError; Python refuses that line outright. Next, predict all four before checking: if a = 5, b = "5", c = 5.0, and d = True, what does type() return for each?


int, string, float and bool

Yep—with one small Python naming detail: the string type is called str. Now predict all three before checking: what do you think a == c, a == b, and d == 1 return?


true, false, true

Yep, all three predictions are right. Notice especially that a == b quietly returns False rather than throwing an error—where else have you seen a wrong answer arrive with no error?


I'm not sure

Think back to Session 1’s t-test demo: the code ran cleanly, but something subtle was wrong with a column value. Do you remember what was hiding in that value?


Oh right, there were hidden spaces that made some values be thrown out. I assume the spaces made the program think it was a string not a number and so not consider it

You’ve got the important connection: a tiny data mismatch can produce a plausible wrong result without an error. One correction: the issue was a trailing space changing how a value compared, rather than simply turning a number into a string—why is a silent False potentially more dangerous than a TypeError?



Because you don't know that there is an error happening, and you think the code is running as intended

Exactly—that’s the key idea: code that runs isn’t necessarily code that’s correct. Next: suppose age_str = "42" and then you try result = age_str + 8; predict first—which happens: a TypeError, "428", or 50?



I think it would be "428" cause it concatenates 

Good prediction—the concatenation idea makes sense if both values were strings. Here one is a str and the other is an int; do you think Python will automatically decide which one to convert, or refuse to guess?


Oh true, I guess it would do a Type error

Yep—it raises a TypeError rather than guessing what you intended. Is Python refusing to guess a good thing or a bad thing here, and why?


It's good because it could have assumed both are string and pass an incorrect value

Exactly—the visible failure gives you a chance to catch the mismatch instead of accepting a silent wrong result. What do you think whoever wrote this probably intended the result to be, and what kind of conversion would make that intent explicit?


it seems they intended both to be considered integers and be added, so you could cast it and write int(age_str)+8

Exactly—you identified the intended type first, then chose the conversion to match it. Now for the important traceback problem: read the bottom line first—what is it actually complaining about?

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "clean.py", line 27, in <module>
    total = ages.sum() + max_age
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'str'



its saying you can't add integers and strings cause the + operator doesn't support that

Exactly. Of the two things being added, which one do you suspect is the string, and how would you find out?


probably max_age because ages.sum() looks like the function sum is being applied to ages and sum will not work on strings and returns a float





Good reasoning that max_age is the likely string. One correction: a sum doesn’t necessarily return a float—its type depends on what’s being summed; what could you inspect about max_age to confirm your suspicion?


you could run Type(max_age)

Yes—that’s the right idea; in Python the function name is lowercase: type(max_age). Now the bigger question: line 27 is where the program crashed, but is line 27 necessarily where the bug actually started?


no, max_age could have been defined before that



Exactly—the crash is on line 27, but the type mistake could have happened upstream when max_age got its value. If max_age was supposed to be a number, where would you want to catch that type mismatch: when it first gets its value, or only when the addition crashes?


Probably when you first assign the value

Right—catching it when the value enters your analysis keeps the bad type from propagating downstream. Now suppose passed contains True, False, True, True, False: predict first—what would sum(passed) and then sum(passed)/len(passed) give you?


sum(passed) gives 3 and sum(passed)/ length(passed) might give zero

3 is right. Before checking the second one, think about Python’s / operator: what do you predict 3 / 5 returns?


Well I don't know how division works with integers. I would think 0.6 but it might round to an int like 1




Good uncertainty to flag—Python’s / division doesn’t round just because both inputs are integers. Given that, what do you now predict for sum(passed)/len(passed)?


it would be 3/5 which is .6

Exactly, 0.6. For a researcher, what could that 0.6 represent if True means a sample passed quality control?


it would mean 60% of the samples passed he quality control



Exactly—it gives you the proportion that passed QC. Let’s jump to another important one: predict first, does 0.1 + 0.2 == 0.3return True or False?


False cause floats have trailing decimals

Right—False; more precisely, floats store many decimal values only approximately in binary, so tiny differences can appear. What does that suggest about using == to compare results involving floats?


You shouldn't use == with floats and rather a < or > like 3.0-(.1+.2) <.0001

Exactly—the useful idea is to compare whether the difference is smaller than a chosen tolerance rather than demanding exact equality. Now the key scenario: an AI sees our earlier TypeError and suggests converting max_age to a string; the error disappears, but you get "4210" instead of 52—did the AI actually fix the bug?


No it turned it into concatenating string instead of adding numbers

Exactly—the error disappeared, but the intended calculation is still wrong. What did the AI know from the error message, and what could it not know about what max_age was supposed to represent?


it knew it was adding a int and str but didn't know which was miss cast

Exactly—it could see the type mismatch, but it couldn’t infer your scientific intent about which type was correct. What could you include in your prompt so the AI knows that max_age is supposed to be numeric?


say that max_age is a count that is numeric

Exactly—stating the intended type gives the AI information the error message alone doesn’t contain. To wrap up in one sentence: what’s the one thing about types you want to remember when you paste code or an error into an AI assistant?


You want to make sure all you variables are the correct types and define them when talking to AI assistants

Yes—that’s the takeaway: verify that variables have the types you intend, and tell the AI that intent rather than assuming it can infer it.
Before you leave, paste this whole conversation into the Session 2 participation assignment on Brightspace as-is, including anywhere we changed our minds or went in circles. Credit is for engaging with the questions, not for getting everything right.


thanks

You’re welcome! Nice work today. Good luck with the rest of class.
